[Docs] Introduction to interfaces (#15837)
digital-asset/daml: docs/source/daml/intro/13_Interfaces.rst

Overall, the effect is that a ``Cash`` contract can be transferred to another
party, if they agree, in two steps.

The declarations from ``intro13/daml/NFT.daml`` declare the templates ``NFT``
and ``NFTTransferProposal`` following the same pattern, with names changed where
appropriate, with the main difference being that an ``NFT`` has a ``url : Text``
field whereas ``Cash`` has ``currency : Text`` and ``amount : Decimal``.

Interface definition
--------------------

To abstract this behavior, we introduce two interfaces, ``IAsset`` and
``IAssetTransferProposal``.

.. hint::
  It is not mandatory to prefix interface names with the letter ``I``, but it
  can be convenient to tell at a glance whether or not a type is an interface.

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/IAsset.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_DEF_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/IAsset.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_TF_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_TF_DEF_END

There are a few things happening here:

1. For each interface, we have defined a ``viewtype``. This is mandatory for all

>    interfaces. All viewtypes must be serializable records, since <insert

Reviewer: `<insert justification here>` - who would provide the best advice on this part?

Reviewer 2: I agree. I don't think we explain why template arguments need to be serializable either, but they need to be. If you feel like empowering the user to learning more, I think you can make "serializable records" a hyperlink pointing to https://docs.daml.com/daml/reference/templates.html#serializable-types.

Author: done, thank you both

   with the choices of ``Cash`` / ``CashTransferProposal`` and ``NFT`` /
   ``NFTTransferProposal``.

   You should notice that the choice controller and the choice body are defined
   in terms of the methods that we bundled with the interfaces, including the
   special ``view`` method. For example, the controller of
   ``choice ProposeIAssetTransfer`` is ``(view this).owner``, that is, it's the
   ``owner`` field of the ``view`` for the implicit current contract ``this``,
   in other words, the owner of the current contract. The body of this choice is
   ``create (toTransferProposal this newOwner)``, so it creates a new contract
   whose contents are the result of applying the ``toTransferProposal`` method
   to the current contract and the ``newOwner`` field of the choice argument.

.. hint::
  For a detailed explanation of the syntax used here, check out :ref:`daml-ref-interfaces`

Interface instances
-------------------

On its own, an interface isn't very useful, since all contracts on the ledger
must belong to some template type. In order to make the link between an
interface and a template, we define an interface instance on either the

> template or the interface. In this example, we add

Reviewer: Do we want to clarify what we mean here, maybe "by writing the instance inside either the interface body or the template body" - maybe would be good to amend `Cash.daml` to have one instance inside the interface too

Then again this might just confuse them

Author: reworded to "we define an interface instance inside the body of either the template or the interface"

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_FOR_CASH_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_FOR_CASH_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_TF_FOR_CASH_TF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_TF_FOR_CASH_TF_END

The corresponding interface instances for ``NFT`` and ``NFTTransferProposal``
are very similar so we omit them here.

Inside the interface instances, we must implement every method defined for the
corresponding interface, including the special ``view`` method.  Within each
method implementation the variable ``this`` is in scope, corresponding to the
implict current contract, which will have the type of the template (in this case
``Cash`` / ``CashTransferProposal``), as well as each of the fields of the
template type. For example, the ``view`` definition in ``interface instance
IAsset for Cash`` mentions ``issuer`` and ``owner``, which refer to the issuer
and owner of the current ``Cash`` contract, as well as ``this``, which refers to

> the entire ``Cash`` contract payload.

Author: Actually no, `self` is only available inside interface choices (which are part of the interface definition, _not_ of the interface instances). However, in the interface choices in my example I didn't need to use `self` at all - actually, I didn't use it in the template choices either. Perhaps we can add a simple choice that does use `self` so we can point it out?

> the entire ``Cash`` contract payload.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the explanation. I just wanted to be sure we do not miss something.

The implementations given for each method must match the types given in the
interface definition. In particular, we see that the ``view`` definition
discussed above returns a ``VAsset``, corresponding to ``IAsset``'s
``viewtype``. Similarly, ``setOwner`` returns an ``IAsset``, and
``toTransferProposal`` returns an ``IAssetTransferProposal``. In these last two,
we have used the function ``toInterface`` to convert values from a template type
into an interface type. In ``setOwner``, ``toInterface`` is applied to a
``Cash`` value (``this with owner = newOwner``), producing an ``IAsset`` value;
in ``toTransferProposal``, it's applied to a ``CashTransferProposal`` value
(``CashTransferProposal with {...}``), producing an ``IAssetTransferProposal``
value.

Using an interface
------------------

Now that we have some interfaces and templates with instances for them, we can
reduce duplication in the code for different templates by instead going through
the common interface.

> For instance, both ``Cash`` and ``NFT`` are ``Asset``s, which means that

Reviewer: It looks like reStructuredText requires there to be a space after the `\`\`` to terminal a monospaced text section. Currently the monospaced text section goes past `Asset` because the "s" has no space separating it from the code section.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/106664681/211784713-388b8247-d6e4-488d-9dec-e564ecf073f9.png)

Author: ah, thank you for spotting this!

I'll try with

```rst
``Asset``\s
```
per https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#character-level-inline-markup-1; it's "not encouraged" but seems like the only option, and there are a few instances of `the ``foo``\s` in our `.rst`s already

``Charlie``'s ownership. This procedure is tested on the ``Cash`` and ``NFT``
templates by the Daml Script tests ``cashTest`` and ``nftTest``, respectively,
both defined in ``intro13/daml/Main.daml``.

But that's a lot of duplication! ``cashTest`` and ``nftTest`` only differ in
the line that creates the original asset and in the names of the choices used.
With our new interfaces ``IAsset`` and ``IAssetTransferProposal``, we can write
the body of this test a single time, which we name ``mkAssetTest``,

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :lines: 2

The idea is that it isn't the test itself, but rather a recipe for making the
test given some inputs - in this case, ``assetTxt`` (a label used for
debugging), ``Parties {..}`` (a structure containing the ``Party`` values for
``Alice`` and friends) and finally ``mkAsset`` (a function that returns a
contract value of type ``t`` when given two ``Party`` arguments - the constraint
``Implements t IAsset`` means that ``t`` must be some template with an interface
instance for ``IAsset``).

Before looking at the body of ``mkAssetTest``, notice how we use it to define

> the new tests ``cashAssetTest`` and ``nftAssetTest``; תhese are almost identical

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the new tests ``cashAssetTest`` and ``nftAssetTest``; these are almost identical
```

Author: oops, thanks for spotting this oen

except for the label and function given in each case to ``mkAssetTest``. In
effect, we have abstracted those away, so we don't need to include those details
in the body of ``mkAssetTest``:

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- CASH_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- CASH_ASSET_TEST_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_CASH_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- MK_CASH_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- NFT_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- NFT_ASSET_TEST_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_NFT_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- MK_NFT_END

In turn, ``mkAssetTest`` isn't very different from other Daml ``Script``s you
might have written before: it uses ``do`` notation as usual, including

> ``submit`` blocks constructed from ``Command``s that define the ordered

Reviewer: Same code delimiting issue here

.. Copyright (c) 2023 Digital Asset (Switzerland) GmbH and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

Daml Interfaces
===============

After defining a few templates in Daml, you've probably found yourself repeating
some behaviors between them. For instance, many templates have a notion of
ownership where a party is designated as the "owner" of the contract, and this
party has the power to transfer ownership of the contract to a different party
(subject to that party agreeing to the transfer!). Daml Interfaces provide a
way to abstract those behaviors into a Daml type.

.. hint::

  Remember that you can load all the code for this section into a folder called
  ``intro13`` by running ``daml new intro13 --template daml-intro-13``

Context
-------

> First, let's define some templates.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
First, define some templates:
```

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- TEMPLATE_CASH_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- TEMPLATE_CASH_DEF_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- TEMPLATE_CASH_TF_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- TEMPLATE_CASH_TF_DEF_END

These declarations from ``intro13/daml/Cash.daml`` define ``Cash`` as a simple

> template with an issuer and an owner, a currency and an amount. A ``Cash``

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
template with an issuer, an owner, a currency, and an amount. A ``Cash``
```

party, if they agree, in two steps.

The declarations from ``intro13/daml/NFT.daml`` declare the templates ``NFT``
and ``NFTTransferProposal`` following the same pattern, with names changed where
appropriate, with the main difference being that an ``NFT`` has a ``url : Text``
field whereas ``Cash`` has ``currency : Text`` and ``amount : Decimal``.

Interface Definition
--------------------

To abstract this behavior, you will next introduce two interfaces: ``IAsset`` and
``IAssetTransferProposal``.

.. hint::
  It is not mandatory to prefix interface names with the letter ``I``, but it
  can be convenient to tell at a glance whether or not a type is an interface.

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/IAsset.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_DEF_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/IAsset.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_TF_DEF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_IASSET_TF_DEF_END

There are a few things happening here:

1. For each interface, you have defined a ``viewtype``. This is mandatory for all

>    interfaces. All viewtypes must be serializable records. This declaration

Reviewer 5: I'd add one sentence to motivate this.

"The viewtype abstracts the read side by providing a uniform way in which implementations of IAsset are represented on the API."

Author: That's a great sentence, thank you @bame-da; I'll add it in a new PR. 

> In line with my one comment, I think it would be great to expand this to talk about interfaces on the APIs and in the bindings

I agree that this (or a later chapter) should talk about interfaces over the ledger API and in the bindings, but I think those fall outside the scope of the language/compiler team.

   to the current contract and the ``newOwner`` field of the choice argument.

.. hint::
  For a detailed explanation of the syntax used here, check out :ref:`daml-ref-interfaces`

Interface instances
-------------------

On its own, an interface isn't very useful, since all contracts on the ledger
must belong to some template type. In order to make the link between an
interface and a template, we define an interface instance inside the body of
either the template or the interface. In this example, we add
``interface instance IAsset for Cash`` and
``interface instance IAssetTransferProposal for CashTransferProposal``:

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_FOR_CASH_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_FOR_CASH_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Cash.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_TF_FOR_CASH_TF_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- INTERFACE_INSTANCE_IASSET_TF_FOR_CASH_TF_END

The corresponding interface instances for ``NFT`` and ``NFTTransferProposal``
are very similar so we omit them here.

> Inside the interface instances, we must implement every method defined for the
> corresponding interface, including the special ``view`` method.  Within each

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Inside the interface instances, you must implement every method defined for the
corresponding interface, including the special ``view`` method.  Within each
```

method implementation the variable ``this`` is in scope, corresponding to the
implict current contract, which will have the type of the template (in this case
``Cash`` / ``CashTransferProposal``), as well as each of the fields of the
template type. For example, the ``view`` definition in ``interface instance
IAsset for Cash`` mentions ``issuer`` and ``owner``, which refer to the issuer
and owner of the current ``Cash`` contract, as well as ``this``, which refers to
the entire ``Cash`` contract payload.

The implementations given for each method must match the types given in the

> interface definition. In particular, we see that the ``view`` definition
> discussed above returns a ``VAsset``, corresponding to ``IAsset``'s
> ``viewtype``. Similarly, ``setOwner`` returns an ``IAsset``, and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
interface definition. Notice that the ``view`` definition
discussed above returns a ``VAsset``, corresponding to ``IAsset``'s
``viewtype``. Similarly, ``setOwner`` returns an ``IAsset``, and
```

``toTransferProposal`` returns an ``IAssetTransferProposal``. In these last two,

> we have used the function ``toInterface`` to convert values from a template type
> into an interface type. In ``setOwner``, ``toInterface`` is applied to a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the function ``toInterface`` converts values from a template type
into an interface type. In ``setOwner``, ``toInterface`` is applied to a
```

``Cash`` value (``this with owner = newOwner``), producing an ``IAsset`` value;

> in ``toTransferProposal``, it's applied to a ``CashTransferProposal`` value

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
in ``toTransferProposal``, it is applied to a ``CashTransferProposal`` value
```

(``CashTransferProposal with {...}``), producing an ``IAssetTransferProposal``
value.

Using an interface
------------------

> Now that we have some interfaces and templates with instances for them, we can
> reduce duplication in the code for different templates by instead going through
> the common interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now that you have some interfaces and templates with instances for them, you can
reduce duplication in the code for different templates by instead going through
the common interface.
```

> For instance, both ``Cash`` and ``NFT`` are ``Asset``\s, which means that

Author: yes, @dylant-da helpfully pointed out that otherwise it gets rendered incorrectly. The workaround is documented [in the RST spec](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#character-level-inline-markup-1)

contracts of either template have an owner who can propose to transfer the

> contract to a third party. Thus, we use Daml Script (see
> :ref:`testing-using-script`) to test that the same contract can be created by

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
contract to a third party. Thus, you can use Daml Script (see
:ref:`testing-using-script`) to test that the same contract can be created by
```

``Alice`` and successively transfered to ``Bob`` and then ``Charlie``, who then
proposes to transfer to ``Dominic``, who rejects the proposal, and finally to
``Emily`` before withdrawing the proposal, so in the end the contract remains in
``Charlie``'s ownership. This procedure is tested on the ``Cash`` and ``NFT``
templates by the Daml Script tests ``cashTest`` and ``nftTest``, respectively,
both defined in ``intro13/daml/Main.daml``.

But that's a lot of duplication! ``cashTest`` and ``nftTest`` only differ in
the line that creates the original asset and in the names of the choices used.

> With our new interfaces ``IAsset`` and ``IAssetTransferProposal``, we can write
> the body of this test a single time, which we name ``mkAssetTest``,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the new interfaces ``IAsset`` and ``IAssetTransferProposal``, you can write
the body of this test a single time, with the name ``mkAssetTest``,
```

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :lines: 2

> The idea is that it isn't the test itself, but rather a recipe for making the
> test given some inputs - in this case, ``assetTxt`` (a label used for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You now have not the test itself, but rather a recipe for making the
test given some inputs - in this case, ``assetTxt`` (a label used for
```

debugging), ``Parties {..}`` (a structure containing the ``Party`` values for
``Alice`` and friends) and finally ``mkAsset`` (a function that returns a
contract value of type ``t`` when given two ``Party`` arguments - the constraint
``Implements t IAsset`` means that ``t`` must be some template with an interface
instance for ``IAsset``).

> Before looking at the body of ``mkAssetTest``, notice how we use it to define
> the new tests ``cashAssetTest`` and ``nftAssetTest``; these are almost identical
> except for the label and function given in each case to ``mkAssetTest``. In
> effect, we have abstracted those away, so we don't need to include those details
> in the body of ``mkAssetTest``:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before looking at the body of ``mkAssetTest``, notice how you use it to define
the new tests ``cashAssetTest`` and ``nftAssetTest``; these are almost identical
except for the label and function given in each case to ``mkAssetTest``. In
effect, you have abstracted those away, so you don't need to include those details
in the body of ``mkAssetTest``:
```

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- CASH_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- CASH_ASSET_TEST_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_CASH_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- MK_CASH_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- NFT_ASSET_TEST_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- NFT_ASSET_TEST_END

.. literalinclude:: daml/daml-intro-13/daml/Main.daml
  :language: daml
  :start-after: -- MK_NFT_BEGIN
  :end-before: -- MK_NFT_END

In turn, ``mkAssetTest`` isn't very different from other Daml ``Script``\s you
might have written before: it uses ``do`` notation as usual, including
``submit`` blocks constructed from ``Command``\s that define the ordered

> transactions that take place in the test. The main difference is that when
> querying values of interface types we cannot use the functions ``query`` and
> ``queryContractId``; instead, we must use ``queryInterface``  (for obtaining the
> set of visible active contracts of a given interface type) and
> ``queryInterfaceContractId`` (for obtaining a single contract given its
> ``ContractId``). Importantly, these functions return the *view* of the contract

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
transactions that take place in the test. The main difference is that when
querying values of interface types you cannot use the functions ``query`` and
``queryContractId``; instead you must use ``queryInterface`` (for obtaining the
set of visible active contracts of a given interface type) and
``queryInterfaceContractId`` (for obtaining a single contract given its
``ContractId``). Importantly, these functions return the *view* of the contract
```

corresponding to the used interface, rather than the contract record itself.

> This is because the ledger might contain contracts of template types that we
> don't know about but that do implement our interface, so the view is the only
> sensible thing it can see.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is because the ledger might contain contracts of template types that you
don't know about but that do implement our interface, so the view is the only
sensible thing it can see.
```
Does "it" refer to the ledger here?

Author: yes, I'll try to rephrase

> Also, note that right after creating the asset with ``createCmd``, we convert
> the resulting ``ContractId t`` into a ``ContractId IAsset`` using
> ``toInterfaceContractId``, which allows us to exercise ``IAsset`` choices on it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Also note that immediately after creating the asset with ``createCmd``, you convert
the resulting ``ContractId t`` into a ``ContractId IAsset`` using
``toInterfaceContractId``, which allows you to exercise ``IAsset`` choices on it.
```
